Novel view synthesis (#130)
johko/computer-vision-course: chapters/en/Unit 8 - 3D Vision, Scene Rendering and Reconstruction/3D Vision/NVS.mdx

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

# Novel View Synthesis

We've seen in the NeRF chapter how, given a large set of images, we
can generate a three-dimensional representation of an object. But

> sometimes we have only a handful of images, or even just a single one.  Novel View

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sometimes we have only a handful of images or even just one.  Novel View
```

> Synthesis (NVS) is a collection of methods which can generate views

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Synthesis (NVS) is a collection of methods to generate views
```

from new camera angles that are plausibly consistent with a set of
images. Once we have a large, consistent set of images we can use NeRF

> or a similar algorithm to construct a 3d representation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or a similar algorithm to construct a 3D representation.
```

Reviewer 2: 3d can read as "third". Better to use "3D"

Many methods have recently been developed for this task. However, they

> can be divided into two general classes - those which generate an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
can be divided into two general classes - those that generate an
```

intermediate three-dimensional representation, which is rendered from a

> new viewing direction, and those which directly produce the new image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
new viewing direction, and those that directly produce a new image.
```

One key difficulty is that this task is almost always underdetermined;
for example, for an image of the back of a sign, there are many
possible different things that could be on the front. Similarly,
there could be parts of the object that are occluded, with one part of
an object in front of another.
If a model is trained to directly predict (regress) the unseen parts,
with a loss penalizing errors in reconstructing held-out views, then
by necessity the model will, when it is not clear what should be
there, predict a blurry, grey colored region, as noted in
[NerfDiff](https://jiataogu.me/nerfdiff/).  This has spurred interest
in the use of generative, diffusion-based models, which are able to
sample from multiple plausible possibilities for the unseen
regions.

Here we will briefly discuss two approaches, which are representative
of the two classes. [PixelNeRF](https://alexyu.net/pixelnerf) directly
predicts a NeRF for the scene from an input
image. [Zero123](https://zero123.cs.columbia.edu/) adapts the Stable
Diffusion latent diffusion model to directly generate new views
without an intermediate 3D representation.

## PixelNeRF

> PixelNeRF is a method which directly generates the parameters of a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PixelNeRF is a method that directly generates the parameters of a
```

> NeRF from one or more images.  (In other words, it conditions the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NeRF from one or more images. In other words, it conditions the
```

> NeRF on the input images.)  Unlike the original NeRF, which trains a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NeRF on the input images. Unlike the original NeRF, which trains a
```

same resolution as the input images.  As in a standard NeRF, the new
view is generated by volume rendering.  However, the NeRF itself has a
slightly unusual structure. At each query point $x$ in the rendered
volume, the corresponding point in the input image(s) is found (by
projecting it using the input image camera transformation $\pi$). The
input image features at this point, $W(\pi x)$ are then found by
bilinear interpolation. Like in the original NeRF, the query point $x$
is positionally encoded and concatentated with the viewing direction
$d$.  The NeRF network consists of a set of ResNet blocks; the input
image features $$W(\pi(x))$$ pass through a linear layer, and are added
to the features at the start of each of the first three residual blocks.  There
are then two further residual blocks to further process these
features, before an output layer to reduce the number of channels to
four (RGB+density). When multiple input views are supplied, these are
processed independently for the first three residual blocks, and then
the features are averaged before the last two blocks.

The original PixelNeRF model was trained on a relatively small set of

> renderings from the ShapeNet dataset.  The model is trained with either one or two

Reviewer 2: Do we have a link to this dataset somewhere? Is it mentioned before? If not, we should link it here.

input images, and attempts to predict a single novel view from a
new camera angle. The loss is the mean-squared error between the
rendered and expected novel views.  A model was trained separately on
each class of object (e.g. planes, benches, cars).

### Results (from the PixelNeRF website)

> ![](https://alexyu.net/pixelnerf/img/teaser/single_01_input.png)

Reviewer 2: +1. Also, please add the alt text for the image

> ![](https://alexyu.net/pixelnerf/img/teaser/single_01.gif)

Reviewer 2: Please add alt text

<sub><sup> image from https://alexyu.net/pixelnerf </sup></sub>

The PixelNeRF code can be found on [GitHub](https://github.com/sxyu/pixel-nerf)

### Related methods

In the [ObjaverseXL](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2307.05663.pdf) paper,
PixelNeRF was trained on a *much* larger dataset.

See also - [Generative Query
Networks](https://deepmind.google/discover/blog/neural-scene-representation-and-rendering/),
[Scene Representation
Networks](https://www.vincentsitzmann.com/srns/),
[LRM](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2311.04400.pdf)

## Zero123 (or Zero-1-to-3)

> Zero123 takes a different approach, being a diffusion model, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Zero123 takes a different approach, being a diffusion model. 
```

> rather than trying to generate a three-dimensional representation, it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rather than trying to generate a three-dimensional representation, it
```

Reviewer 2: When you can split a long sentence into two shorter ones, do so. It makes it easier to read :)

instead directly predicts the image from the new views. The model
takes a single input image, and the relative viewpoint transformation
between the input and novel view direction. It attempts to generate a plausible,

> 3d-consistent image from the novel view direction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3D-consistent image from the novel view direction.
```

Zero123 is built upon the [Stable
Diffusion](https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10752) architecture, and it was
trained by fine-tuning existing weights.  However, it adds a few new
twists. The model actually starts with the weights from [Stable
Diffusion Image
Variations](https://huggingface.co/spaces/lambdalabs/stable-diffusion-image-variations),
which uses the CLIP image embeddings (the final hidden state) of the
input image to condition the diffusion U-Net, instead of a text
prompt. However, here these CLIP image embeddings are concatenated
with the relative viewpoint transformation between the input and novel views.
(This viewpoint change is represented in terms of spherical polar coordinates.)

![Zero123](https://zero123.cs.columbia.edu/assets/teaser.png)
<sub><sup> image from https://zero123.cs.columbia.edu </sup></sub>

The rest of the architecture is the same as Stable Diffusion. However,
the latent representation of the input image is concatenated
channel-wise with the noisy latents before being input into the
denoising U-Net.

> To explore this model further, see the [Live Demo](ce.co/spaces/cvlab/zero123-live)

Reviewer 2: I think it was supposed to be `https://huggingface.co/spaces/cvlab/zero123-live`

![PixelNeRF diagram](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/PixelNeRF_pipeline.png)
image from https://alexyu.net/pixelnerf

The method first passes the input images through a convolutional neural network (ResNet34), bilinearly upsampling features from multiple layers to the same resolution as the input images.  
As in a standard NeRF, the new view is generated by volume rendering. 
However, the NeRF itself has a slightly unusual structure. 
At each query point $x$ in the rendered volume, the corresponding point in the input image(s) is found (by projecting it using the input image camera transformation $\pi$). 
The input image features at this point, $W(\pi x)$ are then found by bilinear interpolation.
Like in the original NeRF, the query point $x$ is positionally encoded and concatentated with the viewing direction $d$.
The NeRF network consists of a set of ResNet blocks; the input image features $W(\pi(x))$ pass through a linear layer, and are added to the features at the start of each of the first three residual blocks.

> There are then two further residual blocks to further process these features, before an output layer to reduce the number of channels to four (RGB+density).

Reviewer 3: just suggestions for a nicer sound/read 
```suggestion
There are then two more residual blocks to further process these features, before an output layer reduces the number of channels to four (RGB+density).
```

Author: I've integrated almost all of the comments here on the three files in common (3d basics) in #132 - there are also other contributions to those three files in #132. I'm not sure what the easiest method is - merge this and then merge 132?
